title: Time zones!
author: Damian Cugley
tags:
- dates

Publication dates are are like a lot of things normally specified as dates,
where some action happens at a particular moment in time. Mismiy treats publication
dates as datetimes, defaulting to midnight if you do not specify the time of
day. It also defaulted to the local time zone, which is probably fine, but
caused trouble when I tried to set up a build & test action on GitHub.

[GitHub Actions] are run on a Ubuntu server whose time zone is set to UTC. During
northern-hemisphere summer my computer is running on British Summer Time.
It follows that my tests failed on CI as soon as they they tried to do anything
with dates.

The fix for this was to get more serious about working out the time zone of
a blog, and ensuring that all the ways we acquire datetimes deal with time
zones correctly. This has become easier with newer versions of Python, where
the [`datetime`] module has more and clearer operations for setting and adjusting
time zones, and the relatively new [`zoneinfo`] module provides support for
modern Zone info specifications.

Thus the `META.yaml` file we introduced to set blog ID and title can also
set `tz`. This specifies the time zone using [IANA tz database] codes like `Europe/London`.
Datetimes supplied without time zone will be assumed to be
in the specified time zone. We have tests now to check that we deal with this on the
way in, so that the Atom-feed-generating code can assume that the datetimes
it is working with are time-zone-aware.

[GitHub Actions]: https://resources.github.com/devops/tools/automation/actions/
[`datetime`]: https://docs.python.org/3/library/datetime.html
[`zoneinfo`]: https://docs.python.org/3/library/zoneinfo.html
[IANA tz database]: https://data.iana.org/time-zones/tz-link.html
