title: Date formatting and locale

I wanted to add publication date to posts’ metadata, and render it in the page. 

The _published_ property of a post has two main functions. First, it is shown
on the page. This requires locale-specific formatting. Second, by setting it
to a future date it indicates that an article is not yet unpublished, so
should be skipped when generating the site.


## Date metadata

The post loader gets the _published_ property from one of two places. It can be
defined in the metadata at the top of the post:

    title: Some post title
    published: 2024-05-19

    Body text starts here

The first exploits uses the schema feature of [StrictYAML] to tell it to interpret
the `published` property as a datetime.

If the property is not specified, and the file name starts with a date (like
`2024-05-19-date.markdown`), then that date is used.

In both cases the date is expressed in the _yyyy-mm-dd_ format described
in [RFC 3339].


## Date formatting

[Mustache] does not directly support formatting dates, so I have come up
with a bit of a kludge that should be OK until we get serious about internationalization
one day.

When creating the context dictionary for generating the post, datetime values
are represented by a dictionary with the following keys:

```python
{
    "year": "2024",
    "month": "5",
    "day": "19",
    "month_2digits": "05",
    "day_2digits": "19",
    "month_name": "May",
    "iso_date": "2024-05-19"
}
```


The template uses this by treating the `published` property as an object:

    {{# published }}
    <time datetime="{{iso_date}}">{{day}} {{month_name}} {{year}}</time>
    {{/ published }}

The month name comes from the [locale] database.


## Hiding unpublished posts

While working on a new post the `mismiy` command will be running in watch
mode so the drafts can be previewed in a browser. When generating a ‘production’
build for copying to the real server, the draft posts and all links to them
shouold be omitted. The `--drafts` flag on the `mismiy` command makes it include
unpublished posts. The `--watch` flag implies `--drafts`.

Generally publication dates are given without a time of day. We will assume that
the time of day us 0:00 in this case.




[locale]: https://docs.python.org/3/library/locale.html
[Mustache]: http://mustache.github.io
[StrictYAML]: https://hitchdev.com/strictyaml/
[RFC 3339]: https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc3339
