title: Fonts with less CSS

For Mismiy’s sample blog I wanted to create just enough of stylesheet to 
be readable without going overboard with fancy font stuff.

I don’t want to include font files in the repo, and I don’t want to use fonts
hosted elsewhere, such as Google fonts, since that probably involves imposing 
tracking cookies on my readers, so instead we can use old-timey [font stacks][1]
using fonts that should already installed on the reader’s computer.

## Fonts for text

For text
I use one of my favourites from the days when the PostScript 35 were all
the fonts we had access to: [Palatino][] (Hermann Zapf, 1949).

    font-family: "Palatino Linotype", "Palatino", "Palladio", "URW Palladio L", "Book Antiqua", serif;

Palatino is a classic old-style, caligraphically inspired text face.
It is legible (originally designed for fairly challenging printing conditions),
and prettier than Times New Roman and Century Schoolbook.
Palladio is URW’s clone; Book Antiqua is Monotype’s unlicensed clone, popularized
by Microsoft’s bundling it with Windows.

Headings are in contrast the obvious Helvetica-style font stach:

    font-family: "Helvetica Neue", "Arial", "Helvetica", sans-serif;

## Fonts for code

These blog posts often deal with compiter code so we need a distinctly different
face for that. It does not have to be monospace: If you aren’t writing Fortran,
you don’t need to line text up in columns, so if your editor supports variable-width
fonts, why not take advantage of them? Variable-width fonts for code were
a feature of SmallTalk systems 45 years ago, so this is not a new idea.

After a bit of experimentation with the fonts ubiquitous at least on commerical
operating systems, I find myself using Verdana (designed by Matthew Carter for Microsoft).
This is a bit surprising given I have always found Verdana kind of clunky and
oversized, but it has
features that make it better for code than Helvetica or Arial, such
as more open counters on letters like `c`, and serifs on `I` and `1`.

On the other hand, the enormous _x_-height makes it look swollen
next to Palatino. So I have used `font-size-adjust` to scale it down:

    code {
      font-family: "Verdana", "DejaVu Sans", "Vera Sans", sans-serif;
      font-size-adjust: 0.469;  /* x-height of Palatino. */
    }

For the sake of including Gnu/Linux systems I need to add alternatives like DejaVu
and Vera (Jim Lyles et al.). They aren’t clones but they have the same design
brief as Verdana.

> Some text that mentions the nonexistent command `mismiy --publish`. Perhaps `StreamWriterFactoryBuilder` is
> the name of a class. Or we might care about `:=` expressions where `left_hand_side`
> is one of the variables.

I originally tried Tahoma and preferred its slightly more condendsed glyphs,
bit it requires a bit of letter spacing that would have looked wrong on the
DejaVu or Vera fallbacks.



[1]: https://www.smashingmagazine.com/2009/09/complete-guide-to-css-font-stacks/
[Palatino]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Palatino#Book_Antiqua
