title: Classification, or (hash)tags
author: Damian Cugley
tags:
- tagging

When, some distant day, there are enough post entries or pages on a site that
they cannot be conveniently listed on one page, we may want to allow our
readers to search and filter posts based on subject. A full-text search
requires back-end support, so for mow we will concentrate on filtering by topic.

## A quick typology of filters

Classification schemes for filtering come in a variety of shapes. Mostly they
involve associating pages with a set of _terms_. The reader uses some UI to
select one or more terms as a filter. Choosing more terms generally means
seeing fewer matches in the filtered list.

Some ways schemes may vary:

- There may be multiple _facets_ (also called _dimensions_ or _axes_), each
  with its own vocabulary of terms. For example, a collection of fashion
  notes might be separately classified by designer and by colour. The
  alternative is a single facet (or perhaps we should say no facets): terms
  for designer and terms for colour would be in the same vocabulary.

- The vocabulary of terms might be _hierarchical_, where some terms are
  refinements or narrowings of others. For example, the term _green_ might
  have narrower terms like  _eau de nil_ and _sage_. When a reader filters
  to _green_ then posts tagged _eau de nil_ should match, even if not
  explicitly tagged _green_.

- Vocabularies may be _closed_ (terms are determined ahead of time)
  or _open_ (terms can be coined while classifying).

Faceted and hierarchical systems tend to be much more complicated to set up
and use, but the trade-off is they may be more specific and efficient. There
are controlled vocabularies for classifying medical papers, for example.


How terms are identified can also vary.

- The identifier for a term might be the term itself. These might be formatted
  as word phrases (like `eau de nil`), or be tokenized forms using camel case
  or similar (like `eauDeNil`). Very common for open systems.

- Terms might have codes (like `C563.3`, say), or be identified by a
  UUID or database identifier. In this case the label for the term is
  the human-readable phrase. More common for closed systems.

In any case user input may need conversion to the identifier. This might
use a menu, or the user might type text that is matched to existing tags.

## Simple tagging

The simplest type of classification system  for users is non-faceted,
non-hierarchical tags, using the word(s) as their own identifier. This is how
hashtags in most social media.

For example, hashtags emerged on a social media site called Twitter back in
2007. They are distinguished from the text of the post by stating with a `#`
and ending at the next space. Since they cannot contain spaces, multiple words
can be combined as camel case as `#superbOwl`, though often people just
use all lower case, as `#superbowl`, even though that can lead to ambiguous
readings. When matching, capitalization is ignored.

The particular format of hashtags comes from Twitter’s having a user interface
consisting of just a box for typing in to.
Flickr and Tumblr, by contrast, have a separate spaces in their forms for entering tags.
This means they can allow spaces in multi-word tags. Other sites like Instagram
and Mastodon persist in embedding tags in the post text, perhaps for the sake of
looking like Twitter.

## Negative tags

As social media become less about searching for things and more about
passively scrolling through a stream of posts chosen for you, tags have come
to be used to _exclude_ rather than _include_ topics. This started with
third-party filters for sites, but has become official in Tumblr, for example.
Thus one might mute the tag `#ai art` so as to reduce the amount of AI-generated
images in your feed.

