title: Thinking about file-name suffixes too much
author: Damian Cugley
published: 2024-07-21T20:00

Should we be using shorter file-name suffixes for the source files and
templates in Mismiy?

## .markdown → .md

In the earlier iterations of Mismiy, we used `.markdown` for the source files.
This has the advantage of being very unambiguous, but is inconsistent with
the common use of `.md` in names like `README.md`.

Strictly speaking, our files contain  Markdown prefixed with metadata in YAML,
rather than just Markdown. But we will follow the lead of [Jekyll]
(and other static site generators) and use `.md` nevertheless.

In the Mismiy code we have (for now) arranged that any mixture of `.md` and
`.markdown` files will work.

## Shaving off the .mustache

The templates used for layouts and partial pages use [Mustache] format and at
present an HTML template will be named something like `post.html.mustache`.
I’ve seen suggestions for shorter suffixes (like `.stach` or `.mu`), but
there is an even shorter alternative: no suffix. The post template would be
named `post.html`, and only the fact the file is in the `templates` directory
tells  us it is a template rather than a finished document.

The biggest advantage of the no-suffix approach is probably that it makes
editors with syntax highlighting highlight the HTML tags rather than the
Mustache tags.

The code changes are trivial, so long as we do not mind imposing a requirement
on existing users (if there are any) renaming their templates.


[Jekyll]: https://jekyllrb.com
[MultiMarkdown]: https://fletcherpenney.net/multimarkdown/
[mustache]: http://mustache.github.io
