title: Atom feed
author: Damian Cugley
tags:
- RSS
- Atom
- XML

Let’s add an [Atom] resource to allow feed readers to read a feed of blog posts.

## A what

Feed readers (also called RSS readers) like [NetNewsWire] are apps for keeping up with blogs
by listing new posts on all your subscribed blogs.
(They use the term _subscription_, but it is not a _paid_ subscription.)
To make this work, the
blog website publishes a file
in a format like RSS, [Atom], or [JSON Feed]. When you subscribe to a blog,
your reader app downloads this periodically to see if new posts have been added.

The _feed_ document corresponds to the blog index page, and it has _entries_
corresponding to blog posts.

## Mismiy version

An [Atom] feed is an XML document. Rather than generate XML with Mustache,
we added a simple XML writer that generates tidy XML code. This slightly contradicts
our aim of writing the minimum code, but using an XML writer avoids wasting
time working out why a mustache template is not generating valid XML.

On top of the metadata we already have,
Atom entries for posts need authors, unique identifiers, and updated datetimes.
Feeds need unique identifiers, and a link to their own URL.

_Author_ objects can be added to the schema for post metadata. Mismiy supports
two formats: the first is just a string, the name of the writer:

```yaml
title: Some blog entry
author: Alice de Winter
```

The other includes extra fields that Atom allows:

```yaml
title: Some blog entry
author:
    name: Alice de Winter
    uri: https://dewinter.example/alice/
    email: alice@dewinter.example
```

Another mandatory field is the `updated` timestamp of the entries. This can be
optionally
specified in the metadata at the top of a post. It is only needed when new
information has been added to the post since it was published: Otherwise
Mismiy can just use the published datetime.


## Digression on identifiers

Atom requires identifiers for entries and the feed as a whole. We want Mimsiy
to be able to derive them from information authors already supply, such as the file
names of the posts, so that authors are not
_required_ to do extra work to satisfy Atom’s requirement.

The unique identifiers for entries are strings in the form of URIs.
They have to be unique and durable. The three
main types of URI that seem applicable are:

- `https://dewinter.example/alice/2024-05-26-something`
- `tag:dewinter.example,2024:alice:2024-05-26-something`
- `urn:uuid:25082a25-c80c-520b-82dc-b36ed5123c3d`

These are respectively

- Normal HTTP URLs (which will not be dereferenced);
- Explicitly non-dereferenceable URIs, using the [Tag URI scheme]; and
- The [UUID URN namespace].

How do we determine the ID for a given post?

- If the feed identifier is one of the first two listed above, we concatenate
  the file name of the post to the feed identifier
  (since that is unique in the scope of the feed);
- If the feed identifier is a UUID, we can generate the post’s UUID using
  the [UUID Version 5] conventions; and
- We can add `id` to the schema for post metadata, for those cases when the
  author wants a particular value.

How do we determine the ID for a given feed?

- The blog author supplies it in a configuration file or command-line argument; or
- It is a UUIDv5 generated from the directory path the posts come from (assumes
  the blog editor never changes it).

The second option means the template for creating a blog need not include
an identifier, reducing the risk that people will accidentally create clashing feeds.

## Other feed formats are available

Existing RSS readers must support Atom, so it follows there is no added
value in supporting other formats. The reason for choosing Atom is that it
is the one with the most thoroughly worked out and clearest specification.

Disappointingly the [Feed Validation Service] still warns
against using an namespace prefix in the XML document, linking to a survey
from 2007 showing many feed readers fail to read XML with namespaces properly.
We are going to ignore that and assume that anyone maintaining a feed reader
in the last decade will have made use of an adequate XML parser.

On Linux and macOS we can check the feed file is valid [using a RelaxNG schema][1]
and the `xmllint` command or the Python package `lxml`.


[Atom]: https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc4287
[JSON Feed]: https://www.jsonfeed.org
[NetNewsWire]: https://netnewswire.com
[Tag URI scheme]: https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc4151
[UUID URN Namespace]: https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc9562
[UUID Version 5]: https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc9562#name-uuid-version-5
[Feed Validation Service]: https://validator.w3.org/feed/
[1]: https://cweiske.de/tagebuch/atom-validation.htm
