title: Pages that are not posts
author: Damian Cugley
updated: 2024-06-18

Even a basic blog needs some non-post pages (an about page, perhaps [a privacy
policy]). Or we could use Mismiy to generate arbitrary documention
hierarchies, with the blog posts being just a little feature on the side.

Not-post pages can be read from a directory the same as posts. The only real
difference is whether they are included in the index page’s reverse
chronological order and the atom feed. In fact posts are just a special kind
of page.

The new plan is as follows: first, there can be more than
one _source_ of pages, each a directory containing `.markdown` files.
So we might have directories named `posts` and `pages`. These
get merged together on the generated site, so they better use
non-overlapping file names. This is easy if post files always start with the date.

Second, sources have an property named _kind_ that is either `page`
(the default), or `post`. The _kind_ property might be set explictly in in the
`meta.yaml` file, but failing that, the `posts` directory will have kind
`post`, and any other will be `page`.

The kind of page controls the templates used for rendering pages
(`post.html.mustache` versus `page.html.mustache`). The index template
will need to link to both kinds of content, but for a first version it
is probably OK to hard-code links in to the template for `index.html`. In Markdown
normal relative links will work, so we can write

    Blah blah link to [about] blah

    [about]: about.html

And get something like

> Blah blah link to [about](about.html) blah

Feed files will be created for `post` sources. For now we assume there will be
a single feed even if there is more than one post source. We can work out how
to do multi-feed sites when we find we have a need for one.


[a privacy policy]: https://www.jwz.org/xscreensaver/google.html
