title: Tags in Mismiy
author: Damian Cugley
tags: 
- tagging

Here’s how tagging could work in Mismiy.

See the [previous post] for a typology of tagging. 

[previous post]: 2024-09-08-tags.html

## How tags are added

Tags are supplied as part of the post metadata, as a list of strings.

```yaml
title: March Comes in Like a Lion
author: Damian Cugley
tags:
    - anime
    - manga
    - shogi
    - Umino Chika
```

The terms can be multiple words, and can use upper and lower case. When 
filtering, capitalization and spaces will be ignored, so `anime` and `Anime`
will match.

## Navigating with tags

Now we need a way for the reader to see a list of posts (or pages) that have
been tagged with a given tag. Since this is a static site, there are two main options:

1. Create an index page for each combination of tags. These can have URL paths
like `tagged/anime.html` and `tagged/shogi.html`. We can also use
`tagged/manga+shogi.html` to allow for combinatons of tags.

2. Have an index page that contains JavaScript to enable the user to search
for tags and navigate to matching pages. This would be powered by a single
JSON file listing all the tags and which pages they are associated with.

The first option is in some ways the simplest. It entails creating a large
number of index pages (one per combination of tags with at least one page), but that is unlikely to
be a problem. You have to be content with a user interface that mostly
consists of following links between index pages.

The second option entails some fancy JavaScript programming, and also requires
it to download the entire index so that it can present subsets of it to the
user. With a large vocabulary the ability to let the user select tags by
typing instead of scrolling through a long list will be attractive.

For now we will consider the first case. 

## Tagged index pages

If we have _N_ distinct tags, that would seem to imply at least _N_ index pages.
If we want index pages for combinations of tags, there are 2<sup>_N_</sup> combinations.
That’s way too many pages. Luckily we don’t need a page for every possible combination, 
only those that will have a nonempty list of pages.

We can further reduce the number of pages by the following:

- Omitting index pages with a single post, replacing links to such an index
  with a link  to the post. The link will need to be labelled in a way that does
  not cause confusion.
- Combining index pages that have the same set of posts. This happens when
  two tags are always used together—for example, if every post tagged `Atom`
  was also tagged `RSS`.

The first of these only helps if you have a lot of tags that are only used
once, which is arguably not a very useful use of tags (but is usual on Tumblr). 
The second helps if you
tag like a professional photographer is taught to do, with multiple synonyms
and variations on a given term for the sake of search optimization.

Leaving searching for tags by typing in seach terms, the navigation using tags comes 
in three and a half forms:

- Pages & posts that are tagged link to the index pages for those tags.
- Tag pages link to _narrowings_: additional tags that reduce the number of matching
  pages. For example, a tag index for `anime` might have 111 
  pages, and link to the index page for `anime` + `romance` with 32.
- Tag pages link to _widenings_: tags that when removed from the combination
  increase the number of pages. For example, an index page for `anime`+`romance` with 32
  pages might link to `romance` with 47.
- The index page, pages regardless of tags, can link to the single-tag pages,
  but this could be seen as a special case of narrowing (from 0 tags to 1).

The upshot of this is the reader can explore combinations of tags without ever finding
a combination with no matching pages. 

## Formatting

The tag index pages are generated with a template named `tagged.html`, and are given 
paths prefixed with `tagged/`, to keep them tidied away from the other pages.

The narrowing and widening lists all use a TagInfo object that has `label`, `href`, 
and `count` fields.

The label for narrowing 